



Network Working Group                                          R. Shakir
Internet-Draft                                                 A. Shaikh
Intended status: Informational                                 P. Borman
Expires: September 14, 2017                                     M. Hines
                                                              C. Lebsack
                                                               C. Morrow
                                                                  Google
                                                          March 13, 2017


                gRPC Network Management Interface (gNMI)
                  draft-openconfig-rtgwg-gnmi-spec-00

Abstract

   This document describes the gRPC Network Management Interface (gNMI),
   a network management protocol based on the gRPC RPC framework.  gNMI
   supports retrieval and manipuation of state from network elements
   where the data is represented by a tree structure, and addressable by
   paths.  The gNMI service defines operations for configuration
   management, operational state retrieval, and bulk data collection via
   streaming telemtry.

Status of This Memo

   This Internet-Draft is submitted in full conformance with the
   provisions of BCP 78 and BCP 79.

   Internet-Drafts are working documents of the Internet Engineering
   Task Force (IETF).  Note that other groups may also distribute
   working documents as Internet-Drafts.  The list of current Internet-
   Drafts is at http://datatracker.ietf.org/drafts/current/.

   Internet-Drafts are draft documents valid for a maximum of six months
   and may be updated, replaced, or obsoleted by other documents at any
   time.  It is inappropriate to use Internet-Drafts as reference
   material or to cite them other than as "work in progress."

   This Internet-Draft will expire on September 14, 2017.

Copyright Notice

   Copyright (c) 2017 IETF Trust and the persons identified as the
   document authors.  All rights reserved.

   This document is subject to BCP 78 and the IETF Trust's Legal
   Provisions Relating to IETF Documents
   (http://trustee.ietf.org/license-info) in effect on the date of



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 1]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   publication of this document.  Please review these documents
   carefully, as they describe your rights and restrictions with respect
   to this document.  Code Components extracted from this document must
   include Simplified BSD License text as described in Section 4.e of
   the Trust Legal Provisions and are provided without warranty as
   described in the Simplified BSD License.

Table of Contents

   1.  Introduction  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   3
   2.  Common Message Types and Encodings  . . . . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.1.  Reusable Notification Message Format  . . . . . . . . . .   4
     2.2.  Common Data Types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.2.1.  Timestamps  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.2.2.  Paths . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   5
       2.2.3.  Node Values . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
     2.3.  Encoding Data in an Update Message  . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.3.1.  JSON and JSON_IETF  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   6
       2.3.2.  Bytes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       2.3.3.  Protobuf  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       2.3.4.  ASCII . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
     2.4.  Use of Data Schema Paths  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       2.4.1.  Path Prefixes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   9
       2.4.2.  Path Aliases  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  10
       2.4.3.  Interpretation of Paths Used in RPCs  . . . . . . . .  11
     2.5.  Error handling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  12
     2.6.  Schema Definition Models  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
       2.6.1.  The ModelData message . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  13
   3.  Service Definition  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  14
     3.1.  Session Security, Authentication and RPC Authorization  .  14
     3.2.  Capability Discovery  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       3.2.1.  The CapabilityRequest message . . . . . . . . . . . .  15
       3.2.2.  The CapabilityResponse message  . . . . . . . . . . .  15
     3.3.  Retrieving Snapshots of State Information . . . . . . . .  16
       3.3.1.  The GetRequest Message  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  16
       3.3.2.  The GetResponse message . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  17
       3.3.3.  Considerations for using Get  . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
     3.4.  Modifying State . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  18
       3.4.1.  The SetRequest Message  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  19
       3.4.2.  The SetResponse Message . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
       3.4.3.  Transactions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  20
       3.4.4.  Modes of Update: Replace versus Update  . . . . . . .  21
       3.4.5.  Modifying Paths Identified by Attributes  . . . . . .  21
       3.4.6.  Deleting Configuration  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  22
       3.4.7.  Error Handling  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  23
     3.5.  Subscribing to Telemetry Updates  . . . . . . . . . . . .  24
       3.5.1.  Managing Subscriptions  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  26
       3.5.2.  Sending Telemetry Updates . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  32



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 2]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


     4.1.  URIs  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  35
   Appendix A.  Appendix: Current Protobuf Message and Service
                Specification  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36
   Appendix B.  Appendix: Current Outstanding Issues/Future Features  36
   Authors' Addresses  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  36

1.  Introduction

   This document defines a gRPC [1]-based protocol for the modification
   and retrieval of configuration from a network element, as well as the
   control and generation of telemetry streams from a network element to
   a data collection system.  The intention is that a single gRPC
   service definition can cover both configuration and telemetry -
   allowing a single implementation on the network element, as well as a
   single NMS element to interact with the device via telemetry and
   configuration RPCs.

   All messages within the gRPC service definition are defined as
   protocol buffers [2] (specifically proto3).  gRPC service definitions
   are expected to be described using the relevant features of the
   protobuf IDL.  A reference protobuf definition is maintained in
   [REFERENCE-PROTO] [3].  The current, authoritative version of this
   specification is available at [GNMI-SPEC] [4].

   The service defined within this document is assumed to carry payloads
   that contain data instances of OpenConfig [5] YANG schemas, but can
   be used for any data with the following characteristics:

   1.  structure can be represented by a tree structure where nodes can
       be uniquely identified by a path consisting of node names, or
       node names coupled with attributes;

   2.  values can be serialised into a scalar object.

   Currently, values may be serialised to a scalar object through
   encoding as a JSON string, a byte-array, or a serialised protobuf
   object - although the definition of new serialisations is possible.

   Throughout this specification the following terminology is used:

   o  _Telemetry_ - refers to streaming data relating to underlying
      characteristics of the device - either operational state or
      configuration.

   o  _Configuration_ - elements within the data schema which are read/
      write and can be manipulated by the client.





Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 3]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   o  _Target_ - the device within the protocol which acts as the owner
      of the data that is being manipulated or reported on.  Typically
      this will be a network device.

   o  _Client_ - the device or system using the protocol described in
      this document to query/modify data on the target, or act as a
      collector for streamed data.  Typically this will be a network
      management system.

2.  Common Message Types and Encodings

2.1.  Reusable Notification Message Format

   When a target wishes to communicate data relating to the state of its
   internal database to an interested client, it does so via means of a
   common "Notification" message.  Notification messages are reused in
   other higher-layer messages for various purposes.  The exact use of
   the Notification message is described on a per-RPC basis.

   The fields of the Notification message are as follows:

   o  "timestamp" - The time at which the data was collected by the
      device from the underlying source, or the time that the target
      generated the Notification message (in the case that the data does
      not reflect an underlying data source).  This value is always
      represented according to the definition in Section 2.2.1.

   o  "prefix" - a prefix which is applied to all path fields (encoded
      as per Section 2.2.2) included in the "Notification" message.  The
      paths expressed within the message are formed by the concatenation
      of "prefix + path".  The "prefix" always precedes the "path"
      elements.  Further semantics of prefixes are described in
      Section 2.4.1.

   o  "alias"- a string providing an alias for the prefix specified
      within the notification message.  The encoding of an alias, and
      the procedure for their creation is described in Section 2.4.2"."

   o  "update" - a list of update messages that indicate changes in the
      underlying data of the target.  Both modification and creation of
      data is expressed through the update message.

      *  An "Update" message has two subfields:

         +  "path" - a path encoded as per Section 2.2.2.

         +  "value" - a value encoded as per Section 2.2.3.




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 4]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


      *  The set of paths that are specified within the list of updates
         MUST be unique.  In this context, the path is defined to be the
         fully resolved path (including the prefix).  In the case that
         there is a duplicate path specified within an update, only the
         final update should be processed by the receiving entity.

   o  "delete" - a list of paths (encoded as per Section 2.2.2) that
      indicate the deletion of data nodes on the target.

   The creator of a Notification message MUST include the "timestamp"
   field.  All other fields are optional.

2.2.  Common Data Types

2.2.1.  Timestamps

   Timestamp values MUST be represented as the number of nanoseconds
   since the Unix epoch (January 1st 1970 00:00:00 UTC).  The value MUST
   be encoded as a signed 64-bit integer ("int64").

2.2.2.  Paths

   Paths are represented according to gNMI Path Conventions [6], a
   simplified form of XPATH.  Rather than utilising a single string to
   represent the path - with the "/" character separating each element
   of the path, the path is represented by an ordered list of strings,
   starting at the root node, and ending at the most specific path
   element.

   A path is represented by the "Path" message with the following
   fields:

   o  "element" -- a set of path elements, encoded as strings (see
      examples below).

   o  "origin" - field which MAY be used to disambiguate the path if
      necessary.  For example, the origin may be used to indicate which
      organization defined the schema to which the path belongs.

   Each "Path" element should correspond to a node in the data tree.
   For example, the path "/a/b/c/d" is encoded as:

                              path: <
                                element: "a"
                                element: "b"
                                element: "c"
                                element: "d"
                              >



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 5]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   Where attributes are to be specified, these are encoded alongside the
   node name within the path element, for example a node specified by
   "/a/e[key=k1]/f/g" would have the path encoded as:

                          path: <
                            element: "a"
                            element: "e[key=k1]"
                            element: "f"
                            element: "g"
                          >

   The root node ("/") is indicated by encoding a single path element
   which is an empty string, as per the following example:

                               path: <
                                 element: ""
                               >

   Paths (defined to be the concatenation of the "Prefix" and "Path"
   within the message) specified within a message MUST be absolute - no
   messages with relative paths should be generated.

2.2.3.  Node Values

   The value of a data node is encoded as a two-field message:

   o  "bytes" - an arbitrary series of bytes which indicates the value
      of the node referred to within the message context.

   o  "type" - a field indicating the type of data contained in the
      bytes field.  Currently defined types are:

2.3.  Encoding Data in an Update Message

2.3.1.  JSON and JSON_IETF

   The "JSON" type indicates that the value included within the "bytes"
   field of the node value message is encoded as a JSON string.  This
   format utilises the specification in RFC7159 [7].  Additional types
   (e.g., "JSON_IETF") are utilised to indicate specific additional
   characteristics of the encoding of the JSON data (particularly where
   they relate to serialisation of YANG-modeled data).

   For any JSON encoding:

   o  In the case that the data item at the specified path is a leaf
      node (i.e., has no children) the value of that leaf is encoded




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 6]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


      directly - i.e., the "bare" value is specified (i.e., a JSON
      object is not required, and a bare JSON value is included).

   o  Where the data item referred to has child nodes, the value field
      contains a serialised JSON entity (object or array) corresponding
      to the referenced item.

   Using the following example data tree:

               root +
                    |
                    +-- a +
                          |
                          +-- b[name=b1] +
                                         |
                                         +-- c +
                                               |
                                               +-- d (string)
                                               +-- e (uint32)

   The following serialisations would be used (note that the examples
   below follow the conventions for textproto, and Golang-style
   backticks are used for string literals that would otherwise require
   escaping):

   For "/a/b[name=b1]/c/d":

                         update: <
                           path: <
                             element: "a"
                             element: "b[name=b1]"
                             element: "c"
                             element: "d"
                           >
                           value: <
                             value: "AStringValue"
                             type: JSON
                           >
                         >

   For "/a/b[name=b1]/c/e":










Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 7]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


                 update: <
                   path: <
                     element: "a"
                     element: "b[name=b1]"
                     element: "c"
                     element: "e"
                   >
                   value: <
                     Value: 10042    // decoded byte array
                     type: JSON
                   >
                 >

   For "/a/b[name=b1]/c":

              update: <
                path: <
                  element: "a"
                  element: "b[name=b1]"
                  element: "c"
                >
                value: <
                  value: { "d": "AStringValue", "e": 10042 }
                  type: JSON
                >
              >

   For "/a" :

               update: <
                 path: <
                   element: "a"
                 >
                 value: <
                   value: `{ "b": [
                                     {
                                       "name": "b1",
                                       "c": {
                                       "d": "AStringValue",
                                         "e": 10042
                                       }
                                      }
                                  ]
                           }`
                   type: JSON_IETF
                 >
               >




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 8]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   Note that all JSON values MUST be valid JSON.  That is to say, whilst
   a value or object may be included in the message, the relevant
   quoting according to the JSON specification in RFC7159 [8] must be
   used.  This results in quoted string values, and unquoted number
   values.

   "JSON_IETF" encoded data MUST conform with the rules for JSON
   serialisation described in RFC7951 [9].  Data specified with a type
   of JSON MUST be valid JSON, but no additional constraints are placed
   upon it.  An implementation MUST NOT serialise data with mixed "JSON"
   and "JSON_IETF" encodings.

   Both the client and target MUST support the JSON encoding as a
   minimum.

2.3.2.  Bytes

   The "BYTES" type indicates that the contents of the "bytes" field of
   the message contains a byte sequence whose semantics is opaque to the
   protocol.

2.3.3.  Protobuf

   The "PROTOBUF" type indicates that the contents of the "bytes" field
   of the message contains a serialised protobuf message.  Note that in
   the case that the sender utilises this type, the receiver must
   understand the schema (and hence the type of protobuf message that is
   serialised) in order to decode the value.  Such agreement is not
   guaranteed by the protocol and hence must be established out-of-band.

2.3.4.  ASCII

   The "ASCII" type indicates that the contents of the "bytes" field of
   the message contains system-formatted ASCII encoded text.  For
   configuration data, for example, this may consist of semi-structured
   CLI configuration data formatted according to the target platform.
   The gNMI protocol does not define the format of the text - this must
   be established out-of-band.

2.4.  Use of Data Schema Paths

2.4.1.  Path Prefixes

   In a number of messages, a prefix can be specified to reduce the
   lengths of path fields within the message.  In this case, a "prefix"
   field is specified within a message - comprising of a valid path
   encoded according to Section Section 2.2.2 In the case that a prefix
   is specified, the absolute path is comprised of the concatenation of



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017               [Page 9]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   the list of path elements representing the prefix and the list of
   path elements in the "path" field.

   For example, again considering the data tree shown in
   Section Section 2.3.1 if a "Notification" message updating values, a
   prefix could be used to refer to the "/a/b[name=b1]/c/d" and
   "/a/b[name=b1]/c/e"data nodes:

        notification: <
            timestamp: (timestamp)      // timestamp as int64
            prefix: <
             element: "a"
              element: "b[name=b1]"
              element: "c"
            >
          update: <
            path: <
              element: "d"
            >
            value: <
              value: "AStringValue"
              type: JSON
            >
          >
          update: <
            path: <
              element: "e"
            >
            value: <
              value: 10042      // converted to int representation
              type: JSON
            >
          >
        >

2.4.2.  Path Aliases

   In some cases, a client or target MAY desire to utilises aliases for
   a particular path - such that subsequent messages can be compressed
   by utilising the alias, rather than using a complete representation
   of the path.  Doing so reduces total message length, by ensuring that
   redundant information can be removed.

   Support for path aliases MAY be provided by a target.  In a case
   where a target does not support aliases, the maximum message length
   SHOULD be considered, especially in terms of bandwidth utilisation,
   and the efficiency of message generation.




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 10]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   A path alias is encoded as a string.  In order to avoid valid data
   paths clashing with aliases (e.g., "a" in the above example), an
   alias name MUST be prefixed with a "#" character.

   The means by which an alias is created is defined on a per-RPC basis.
   In order to delete an alias, the alias name is sent with the path
   corresponding to the alias empty.

   Aliases MUST be specified as a fully expanded path, and hence MUST
   NOT reference other aliases within their definition, such that a
   single alias lookup is sufficient to resolve the absolute path.

2.4.3.  Interpretation of Paths Used in RPCs

   When a client specifies a path within an RPC message which indicates
   a read, or retrieval of data, the path MUST be interpreted such that
   it refers to the node directly corresponding with the path *and* all
   its children.  The path refers to the direct node and all descendent
   branches which originate from the node, recursively down to each leaf
   element.  If specific nodes are expected to be excluded then an RPC
   MAY provide means to filter nodes, such as regular-expression based
   filtering, lists of excluded paths, or metadata-based filtering
   (based on annotations of the data schema being manipulated, should
   such annotations be available and understood by both client and
   target).

   For example, consider the following data tree:

                 root +
                      |
                      +-- childA +
                      |          |
                      |          +-- leafA1
                      |          +-- leafA2
                      |          +-- childA3 --+
                      |                        |
                      |                        +-- leafA31
                      |                        +-- leafA32
                      |
                      +-- childB +
                                 |
                                 +-- leafB1
                                 +-- leafB2

   A path referring to "root" (which is represented by a Path consisting
   of a single element specifying an empty string) should result in the
   nodes "childA" and "childB" and all of their children ("leafA1,




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 11]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   leafA2, leafB1, leafB2, childA3, leafA31" and "leafA32") being
   considered by the relevant operation.

   In the case that the RPC is modifying the state of data (i.e., a
   write operation), such recursion is not required - rather the
   modification operation should be considered to be targeted at the
   node within the schema that is specified by the path, and the value
   should be deserialized such that it modifies the content of any child
   nodes if required to do so.

2.5.  Error handling

   Where the client or target wishes to indicate an error, an "Error"
   message is generated.  Errors MUST be represented by a canonical gRPC
   error code (Java [10], Golang [11], C++ [12]) . The entity generating
   the error MUST specify a free-text string which indicates the context
   of the error, allowing the receiving entity to generate log entries
   that allow a human operator to understand the exact error that
   occurred, and its context.  Each RPC defines the meaning of the
   relevant canonical error codes within the context of the operation it
   performs.

   The canonical error code that is chosen MUST consider the expected
   behavior of the client on receipt of the message.  For example, error
   codes which indicate that a client may subsequently retry SHOULD only
   be used where retrying the RPC is expected to result in a different
   outcome.

   A re-usable "Error" message MUST be used when sending errors in
   response to an RPC operation.  This message has the following fields:

   o  "code" - an unsigned 32-bit integer value corresponding to the
      canonical gRPC error code.

   o  "message"- a human-readable string describing the error condition
      in more detail.  This string is not expected to be machine-
      parsable, but rather provide contextual information which may be
      passed to upstream systems.

   o  "data"- an arbitrary sequence of bytes (encoded as
      "[proto.Any](https://github.com/google/protobuf/blob/master/src/
      google/protobuf/any.proto)") which provides further contextual
      information relating to the error.








Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 12]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


2.6.  Schema Definition Models

   The data tree supported by the target is expected to be defined by a
   set of schemas.  The definition and format of these models is out of
   scope of this specification (YANG-modeled data is one example).  In
   the case that such schema definitions are used, the client should be
   able to determine the models that are supported by the target, so
   that it can generate valid modifications to the data tree, and
   interpret the data returned by "Get" and "Subscribe" RPC calls.

   Additionally, the client may wish to restrict the set of models that
   are utilised by the target so that it can validate the data returned
   to it against a specific set of data models.  This is particularly
   relevant where the target may otherwise add new values to restricted
   value data elements (e.g., those representing an enumerated type), or
   augment new data elements into the data tree.

   In order to allow the client to restrict the set of data models to be
   used when interacting with the target, the client MAY discover the
   set of models that are supported by the target using the
   "Capabilities" RPC described in Section 3.2.  For subsequent "Get"
   and "Subscribe" RPCs, the client MAY specify the models to be used by
   the target.  The set of models to use is expressed as a "ModelData"
   message, as specified in Section 2.6.1.

   If the client specifies a set of models in a "Get" or "Subscribe"
   RPC, the target MUST NOT utilize data tree elements that are defined
   in schema modules outside the specified set.  In addition, where
   there are data tree elements that have restricted value sets (e.g.,
   enumerated types), and the set is extended by a module which is
   outside of the set, such values MUST NOT be used in data instances
   that are sent to the client.  Where there are other elements of the
   schema that depend on the existence of such enumerated values, the
   target MUST NOT include such values in data instances sent to the
   client.

2.6.1.  The ModelData message

   The "ModelData" message describes a specific model that is supported
   by the target and used by the client.  The fields of the "ModelData"
   message identify a data model registered in a model catalog, as
   described in [MODEL_CATALOG_DOC] [13]  (the schema of the catalog
   itself - expressed in YANG - is described in [MODEL_CATALOG_YANG
   [14]]).  Each model specified by a "ModelData" message may refer to a
   specific schema module, a bundle of modules, or an augmentation or
   deviation, as described by the catalog entry.

   Each "ModelData" message contains the following fields:



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 13]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   o  "name" - name of the model expressed as a string.

   o  "organization" - the organization publishing the model, expressed
      as a string.

   o  "version" - the supported (or requested) version of the model,
      expressed as a string which represents the semantic version of the
      catalog entry.

   The combination of "name", "organization", and "version" uniquely
   identifies an entry in the model catalog.

3.  Service Definition

   A single gRPC service is defined - future revisions of this
   specification MAY result in additional services being introduced, and
   hence an implementation MUST NOT make assumptions that limit to a
   single service definition.

   The service consists of the following RPCs:

   o  "Capabilities" - defined in Section 3.2 and used by the client and
      target as an initial handshake to exchange capability information

   o  "Get" - defined in Section 3.3, used to retrieve snapshots of the
      data on the target by the client.

   o  "Set" - defined in Section 3.4 and used by the client to modify
      the state of the target.

   o  "Subscribe" - defined in Section 3.5 and used to control
      subscriptions to data on the target by the client.

3.1.  Session Security, Authentication and RPC Authorization

   The session between the client and server MUST be encrypted using TLS
   - and a target or client MUST NOT fall back to unencrypted channels.

   New connections are mutually authenticated -- each entity validates
   the X.509 certificate of the remote entity to ensure that the remote
   entity is both known, and authorized to connect to the local system.

   If the target is expected to authenticate an RPC operation, the
   client MUST supply a username and password in the metadata of the RPC
   message (e.g., "SubscribeRequest", "GetRequest" or "SetRequest").  If
   the client supplies username/password credentials, the target MUST
   authenticate the RPC per its local authentication functionality.




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 14]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   Authorization is also performed per-RPC by the server, through
   validating client-provided metadata.  The client MAY include the
   appropriate AAA metadata, which MUST contain a username, and MAY
   include a password in the context of each RPC call it generates.  If
   the client includes both username and password, the target MUST
   authenticate and authorize the request.  If the client only supplies
   the username, the target MUST authorize the RPC request.

   A more detailed discussion of the requirements for authentication and
   encryption used for gNMI is in [GNMI-AUTH] [15].

3.2.  Capability Discovery

   A client MAY discover the capabilities of the target using the
   "Capabilities" RPC.  The "CapabilityRequest" message is sent by the
   client to interrogate the target.  The target MUST reply with a
   "CapabilityResponse" message that includes its gNMI service version,
   the versioned data models it supports, and the supported data
   encodings.  This information is used in subsequent RPC messages from
   the client to indicate the set of models that the client will use
   (for "Get", "Subscribe" as described in Section 2.6) , and the
   encoding to be used for the data.

   When the client does not specify the models it is using, the target
   SHOULD use all data schema modules that it supports when considering
   the data tree to be addressed.  If the client does not specify the
   encoding in an RPC message, it MUST send JSON encoded values (the
   default encoding).

3.2.1.  The CapabilityRequest message

   The "CapabilityRequest" message is sent by the client to request
   capability information from the target.  The "CapabilityRequest"
   message carries no additional fields.

3.2.2.  The CapabilityResponse message

   The "CapabilityResponse" message has the following fields:

   o  "supported_models" - a set of "ModelData" messages (as defined in
      Section 2.6.1) describing each of the models supported by the
      target

   o  "supported_encodings" - an enumeration field describing the data
      encodings supported by the target, as described in Section 2.3.






Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 15]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   o  "gNMI_version" - the semantic version of the gNMI service
      supported by the target, specified as a string.  The version
      should be interpreted as per [OPENCONFIG-SEMVER [16]].

3.3.  Retrieving Snapshots of State Information

   In some cases, a client may require a snapshot of the state that
   exists on the target.  In such cases, a client desires some subtree
   of the data tree to be serialized by the target and transmitted to
   it.  It is expected that the values that are retrieved (whether
   writeable by the client or not) are collected immediately and
   provided to the client.

   The "Get" RPC provides an interface by which a client can request a
   set of paths to be serialized and transmitted to it by the target.
   The client sends a "GetRequest" message to the target, specifying the
   data that is to be retrieved.  The fields of the "GetRequest" message
   are described in Section 3.3.1.

   Upon reception of a "GetRequest", the target serializes the requested
   paths, and returns a "GetResponse" message.  The target MUST reflect
   the values of the specified leaves at a particular collection time,
   which MAY be different for each path specified within the
   "GetRequest" message.

   The target closes the channel established by the "Get" RPC following
   the transmission of the "GetResponse" message.

3.3.1.  The GetRequest Message

   The "GetRequest" message contains the following fields:

   o  "prefix" - a path (specified as per Section 2.2.2), and used as
      described in Section 2.4.1.  The prefix is applied to all paths
      within the "GetRequest" message.

   o  "path" - a set of paths (expressed as per Section 2.2.2) for which
      the client is requesting a data snapshot from the target.  The
      path specified MAY utilize wildcards.  In the case that the path
      specified is not valid, the target MUST populate the "error" field
      of the "GetResponse" message indicating an error code of
      "InvalidArgument" and SHOULD provide information about the invalid
      path in the error message.

   o  "type" - the type of data that is requested from the target.  The
      valid values for type are described below.





Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 16]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   o  "encoding" - the encoding that the target should utilise to
      serialise the subtree of the data tree requested.  The type MUST
      be one of the encodings specified in Section 2.3.  If the
      "Capabilities" RPC has been utilised, the client SHOULD use an
      encoding advertised as supported by the target.  If the encoding
      is not specified, JSON MUST be used.  If the target does not
      support the specified encoding, the target MUST populate the error
      field of the "GetResponse" message, specifying an error of
      "InvalidArgument".  The error message MUST indicate that the
      specified encoding is unsupported.

   o  "use_models" - a set of "ModelData" messages (defined in
      Section 2.6.1) indicating the schema definition modules that
      define the data elements that should be returned in response to
      the Get RPC call.  The semantics of the "use_models" field are
      defined in Section 2.6.

   Since the data tree stored by the target may consist of different
   types of data (e.g., values that are operational in nature, such as
   protocol statistics) - the client MAY specify that a subset of values
   in the tree are of interest.  In order for such filtering to be
   implemented, the data schema on the target MUST be annotated in a
   manner which specifies the type of data for individual leaves, or
   subtrees of the data tree.

   The types of data currently defined are:

   o  "CONFIG" - specified to be data that the target considers to be
      read/write.  If the data schema is described in YANG, this
      corresponds to the "config true" set of leaves on the target.

   o  "STATE" - specified to be the read-only data on the target.  If
      the data schema is described in YANG, "STATE" data is the "config
      false" set of leaves on the target.

   o  "OPERATIONAL" - specified to be the read-only data on the target
      that is related to software processes operating on the device, or
      external interactions of the device.

   If the "type" field is not specified, the target MUST return CONFIG,
   STATE and OPERATIONAL data fields in the tree resulting from the
   client's query.

3.3.2.  The GetResponse message

   The "GetResponse" message consists of:





Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 17]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   o  "notification" - a set of "Notification" messages, as defined in
      Section 2.1.  The target MUST generate a "Notification" message
      for each path specified in the client's "GetRequest", and hence
      MUST NOT collapse data from multiple paths into a single
      "Notification" within the response.  The "timestamp" field of the
      "Notification" message MUST be set to the time at which the
      target's snapshot of the relevant path was taken.

   o  "error" - an "Error" message encoded as per the specification in
      Section 2.5, used to indicate errors in the "GetRequest" received
      by the target from the client.

3.3.3.  Considerations for using Get

   The "Get" RPC is intended for clients to retrieve relatively small
   sets of data as complete objects, for example a part of the
   configuration.  Such requests are not expected to put a significant
   resource burden on the target.  Since the target is expected to
   return the entire snapshot in the "GetResponse" message, "Get" is not
   well-suited for retrieving very large data sets, such as the full
   contents of the routing table, or the entire component inventory.
   For such operations, the "Subscribe" RPC is the recommended
   mechanism, e.g. using the "ONCE" mode as described in Section 3.5.

   Another consideration for "Get" is that the timestamp returned is
   associated with entire set of data requested, although individual
   data items may have been sampled by the target at different times.
   If the client requires higher accuracy for individual data items, the
   "Subscribe" RPC is recommended to request a telemetry stream (see
   Section 3.5.2).

3.4.  Modifying State

   Modifications to the state of the target are made through the "Set"
   RPC.  A client sends a "SetRequest" message to the target indicating
   the modifications it desires.

   A target receiving a "SetRequest" message processes the operations
   specified within it - which are treated as a transaction (see
   Section 3.4.3).  The server MUST process deleted paths (within the
   "delete" field of the "SetRequest"), followed by paths to be replaced
   (within the "replace" field), and finally updated paths (within the
   "update" field).  The order of the replace and update fields MUST be
   treated as significant within a single "SetRequest" message.  If a
   single path is specified multiple times for a single operation (i.e.,
   within "update" or "replace"), then the state of the target MUST
   reflect the application of all of the operations in order, even if
   they overwrite each other.



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 18]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   In response to a "SetRequest", the target MUST respond with a
   "SetResponse" message.  For each operation specified in the
   "SetRequest" message, an "UpdateResult" message MUST be included in
   the response field of the "SetResponse".  The order in which the
   operations are applied MUST be maintained such that "UpdateResult"
   messages can be correlated to the "SetRequest" operations.  In the
   case of a failure of an operation, the "error" field of the
   "UpdateResult" message MUST be populated with an "Error" message as
   per the specification in Section 2.5.  In addition, the "error" field
   of the "SetResponse" message MUST be populated with an error message
   indicating the success or failure of the set of operations within the
   "SetRequest" message (again using the error handling behavior defined
   in Section 2.5).

3.4.1.  The SetRequest Message

   A "SetRequest" message consists of the following fields:

   o  "prefix" - specified as per Section 2.4.1.  The prefix specified
      is applied to all paths defined within other fields of the
      message.

   o  "delete" - A set of paths, specified as per Section 2.2.2, which
      are to be removed from the data tree.  A specification of the
      behavior of a delete is defined in Section 3.4.6.

   o  "replace" - A set of "Update" messages indicating elements of the
      data tree whose content is to be replaced.

   o  "update" - A set of "Update" messages indicating elements of the
      data tree whose content is to be updated.

   The semantics of "updating" versus "replacing" content are defined in
   Section 3.4.4

   A re-usable "Update" message is utilised to indicate changes to paths
   where a new value is required.  The "Update" message contains two
   fields:

   o  "path" - a path encoded as per Section 2.2.2 indicating the path
      of the element to be modified.

   o  "value" - a value encoded as per Section 2.2.3 indicating the
      value applied to the specified node.  The semantics of how the
      node is updated is dependent upon the context of the update
      message, as specified in Section 3.4.4.





Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 19]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


3.4.2.  The SetResponse Message

   A "SetResponse" consists of the following fields:

   o  "prefix" - specified as per Section 2.4.1.  The prefix specified
      is applied to all paths defined within other fields of the
      message.

   o  "message" - an error message as specified in Section 2.5.  The
      target SHOULD specify a "message" in the case that the update was
      successfully applied, in which case an error code of "OK (0)"
      "MUST" be specified.  In cases where an update was not
      successfully applied, the contents of the error message MUST be
      specified as per Section 2.5.

   o  "response" - containing a list of responses, one per operation
      specified within the "SetRequest" message.  Each response consists
      of an "UpdateResult" message with the following fields:

      *  "timestamp" - a timestamp (encoded as per Section 2.2.1) at
         which the set request message was accepted by the system.

      *  "path" - the path (encoded as per Section 2.2.2) specified
         within the "SetRequest".  In the case that a common prefix was
         not used within the "SetRequest", the target MAY specify a
         "prefix" to reduce repetition of path elements within multiple
         "UpdateResult" messages in the "request" field.

      *  "op" - the operation corresponding to the path.  This value
         MUST be one of "DELETE", "REPLACE", or "UPDATE".

      *  "message" - an error message (as specified in Section 2.5).
         This field follows the same rules as the message field within
         the "SetResponse" message specified above.

3.4.3.  Transactions

   All changes to the state of the target that are included in an
   individual "SetRequest" message are considered part of a transaction.
   That is, either all modifications within the request are applied, or
   the target MUST rollback the state changes to reflect its state
   before any changes were applied.  The state of the target MUST NOT
   appear to be changed until such time as all changes have been
   accepted successfully.  Hence, telemetry update messages MUST NOT
   reflect a change in state until such time as the intended
   modifications have been accepted.





Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 20]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   As per the specification in Section 3.4, within an individual
   transaction ("SetRequest") the order of operations is "delete",
   "replace", "update".

   As the scope of a "transaction" is a single "SetRequest" message, a
   client desiring a set of changes to be applied together MUST ensure
   that they are encapsulated within a single "SetRequest" message.

3.4.4.  Modes of Update: Replace versus Update

   Changes to read-write values on the target are applied based on the
   "replace" and "update" fields of the "SetRequest" message.

   For both replace and update operations, if the path specified does
   not exist, the target MUST create the data tree element and populate
   it with the data in the "Update" message, provided the path is valid
   according to the data tree schema.  If invalid values are specified,
   the target MUST cease processing updates within the "SetRequest"
   method, return the data tree to the state prior to any changes, and
   return a "SetResponse" message indicating the error encountered.

   For "replace" operations, the behavior regarding omitted data
   elements in the "Update" depends on whether they refer to non-default
   values (i.e., set by a previous "SetRequest"), or unmodified
   defaults.  When the "replace" operation omits values that have been
   previously set, they MUST be treated as deleted from the data tree.
   Otherwise, omitted data elements MUST be created with their default
   values on the target.

   For "update" operations, only the value of those data elements that
   are specified explicitly should be treated as changed.

3.4.5.  Modifying Paths Identified by Attributes

   The path convention defined in Section 2.2.2 allows nodes in the data
   tree to be identified by a unique set of node names (e.g.,"/a/b/c/d")
   or paths that consist of node names coupled with attributes (e.g.,
   "/a/e[key=10]").  In the case where where a node name plus attribute
   name is required to uniquely identify an element (i.e., the path
   within the schema represents a list, map, or array), the following
   considerations apply:

   o  In the case that multiple attribute values are required to
      uniquely address an element - e.g., "/a/f[k1=10][k2=20]"- and a
      replace or update operation's path specifies a subset of the
      attributes (e.g., "/a/f[k1=10]") then this MUST be considered an
      error by the target system - and an error code of"InvalidArgument
      (3)" specified.



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 21]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   o  Where the path specified refers to a node which itself represents
      the collection of objects (list, map, or array) a replace
      operation MUST remove all collection entries that are not supplied
      in the value provided in the "SetRequest".  An update operation
      MUST be considered to add new entries to the collection if they do
      not exist.

   o  In the case that key values are specified both as attributes of a
      node, and as their own elements within the data tree, update or
      replace operations that modify instances of the key in conflicting
      ways MUST be considered an error.  The target MUST return an error
      code of "InvalidArgument (3)".

   For example, consider a tree corresponding to the examples above, as
   illustrated below.

              root +
                   |
                   + a --+
                           |
                           +-- f[k1=10][k2=20] --+
                           |                     |
                           |                     +-- k1 = 10
                           |                     +-- k2 = 20
                           |
                           +-- f[k1=10][k2=21] --+
                                                 |
                                                 +-- k1 = 10
                                                 +-- k2 = 21

   In this case, nodes "k1" and "k2" are standalone nodes within the
   schema, but also correspond to attribute values for the node ""f"".
   In this case, an update or replace message specifying a path of "/a/
   f[k1=10][k2=20]" setting the value of "k1" to 100 MUST be considered
   erroneous, and an error code of "InvalidArgument (3)" specified.

3.4.6.  Deleting Configuration

   Where a path is contained within the "delete" field of the
   "SetRequest" message, it should be removed from the target's data
   tree.  In the case that the path specified is to an element that has
   children, these children MUST be recursively deleted.  If a wildcard
   path is utilised, the wildcards MUST be expanded by the target, and
   the corresponding elements of the data tree deleted.  Such wildcards
   MUST support paths specifying a subset of attributes required to
   identify entries within a collection (list, array, or map) of the
   data schema.




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 22]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   In the case that a path specifies an element within the data tree
   that does not exist, these deletes MUST be silently accepted.

3.4.7.  Error Handling

   When a client issues a "SetRequest", and the target is unable to
   apply the specified changes, an error MUST be reported to the client.
   The error is specified in multiple places:

   o  Within a "SetResponse" message, the error field indicates the
      completion status of the entire transaction.

   o  With a "UpdateResult" message, where the error field indicates the
      completion status of the individual operation.

   The target MUST specify the "message" field within a "SetResponse"
   message such that the overall status of the transaction is reflected.
   In the case that no error occurs, the target MUST complete this field
   specifying the "OK (0)" canonical error code.

   In the case that any operation within the "SetRequest" message fails,
   then (as per Section 3.4.3), the target MUST NOT apply any of the
   specified changes, and MUST consider the transaction as failed.  The
   target SHOULD set the "message" field of the "SetResponse" message to
   an error message with the code field set to "Aborted (10)", and MUST
   set the "message" field of the "UpdateResult" corresponding to the
   failed operation to an "Error" message indicating failure.  In the
   case that the processed operation is not the only operation within
   the "SetRequest" the target MUST set the "message" field of the
   "UpdateResult" messages for all other operations, setting the code
   field to "Aborted (10)".

   For the operation that the target is unable to process, the "message"
   field MUST be set to a specific error code indicating the reason for
   failure based on the following mappings to canonical gRPC error
   codes:

   o  When the client has specified metadata requiring authentication
      (see Section 3.1), and the authentication fails - "Unauthenticated
      (16)".

   o  When the client does not have permission to modify the path
      specified by the operation - "PermissionDenied (7)".

   o  When the operation specifies a path that cannot be parsed by the
      target - "InvalidArgument (3)".  In this case, the "message" field
      of the "Error" message specified SHOULD specify human-readable
      text indicating that the path could not be parsed.



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 23]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   o  When the operation is an update or replace operation that
      corresponds to a path that is not valid - "NotFound (5)".  In this
      case the "message" field of the "Error" message specified SHOULD
      specify human-readable text indicating the path that was invalid.

   o  When the operation is an update or replace operation that includes
      an invalid value within the "Update" message specified -
      "InvalidArgument (3)".  This error SHOULD be used in cases where
      the payload specifies scalar values that do not correspond to the
      correct schema type, and in the case that multiple values are
      specified using a particular encoding (e.g., JSON) which cannot be
      decoded by the target.

3.5.  Subscribing to Telemetry Updates

   When a client wishes to receive updates relating to the state of data
   instances on a target, it creates a subscription via the "Subscribe"
   RPC.  A subscription consists of one or more paths, with a specified
   subscription mode.  The mode of each subscription determines the
   triggers for updates for data sent from the target to the client.

   All requests for new subscriptions are encapsulated within a
   "SubscribeRequest" message - which itself has a mode which describes
   the longevity of the subscription.  A client may create a
   subscription which has a dedicated stream to return one-off data
   ("ONCE"); a subscription that utilizes a stream to periodically
   request a set of data ("POLL"); or a long-lived subscription that
   streams data according to the triggers specified within the
   individual subscription's mode ("STREAM").

   The target generates messages according to the type of subscription
   that has been created, at the frequency requested by the client.  The
   methods to create subscriptions are described in Section 3.5.1.

   Subscriptions are created for a set of paths - which cannot be
   modified throughout the lifetime of the subscription.  In order to
   cancel a subscription, the client closes the gRPC channel over which
   the "Subscribe" RPC was initiated, or terminates the entire gRPC
   session.

   Subscriptions are fundamentally a set of independent update messages
   relating to the state of the data tree.  That is, it is not possible
   for a client requesting a subscription to assume that the set of
   update messages received represent a snapshot of the data tree at a
   particular point in time.  Subscriptions therefore allow a client to:

   o  Receive ongoing updates from a target which allow synchronization
      between the client and target for the state of elements within the



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 24]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


      data tree.  In this case (i.e., a "STREAM" subscription), a client
      creating a subscription receives an initial set of updates,
      terminated by a message indicating that initial synchronisation
      has completed, and then receives subsequent updates indicating
      changes to the initial state of those elements.

   o  Receive a single view (polled, or one-off) for elements of the
      data tree on a per-data element basis according to the state that
      they are in at the time that the message is transmitted.  This can
      be more resource efficient for both target and client than a
      "GetRequest" for large subtrees within the data tree.  The target
      does not need to coalesce values into a single snapshot view, or
      create an in-memory representation of the subtree at the time of
      the request, and subsequently transmit this entire view to the
      client.

   Based on the fact that subsequent update messages are considered to
   be independent, and to ensure that the efficiencies described above
   can be achieved, by default a target MUST NOT aggregate values within
   an update message.

   In some cases, however, elements of the data tree may be known to
   change together, or need to be interpreted by the subscriber
   together.  Such data MUST be explicitly marked in the schema as being
   eligible to be aggregated when being published.  Additionally, the
   subscribing client MUST explicitly request aggregation of eligible
   schema elements for the subscription - by means of the
   "allow_aggregation" flag within a "SubscriptionList" message.  For
   elements covered by a subscription that are not explicitly marked
   within the schema as being eligible for aggregation the target MUST
   NOT coalesce these values, regardless of the value of the
   "allow_aggregation" flag.

   When aggregation is not permitted by the client or the schema each
   update message MUST contain a (key, value) pair - where the key MUST
   be a path to a single leaf element within the data tree (encoded
   according to Section 2.2.2).  The value MUST encode only the value of
   the leaf specified.  In most cases, this will be a scalar value
   (i.e., a JSON value if a JSON encoding is utilised), but in some
   cases, where an individual leaf element within the schema represents
   an object, it MAY represent a set of values (i.e., a JSON or Protobuf
   object).

   Where aggregation is permitted by both the client and schema, each
   update message MUST contain a key value pair, where the key MUST be
   the path to the element within the data tree which is explicitly
   marked as being eligible for aggregation.  The value MUST be an
   object which encodes the children of the data tree element specified.



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 25]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   For JSON, the value is therefore a JSON object, and for Protobuf is a
   series of binary-encoded Protobuf messages.

3.5.1.  Managing Subscriptions

3.5.1.1.  The SubscribeRequest Message

   A "SubscribeRequest" message is sent by a client to request updates
   from the target for a specified set of paths.

   The fields of the "SubscribeRequest" are as follows:

   o  A group of fields, only one of which may be specified, which
      indicate the type of operation that the "SubscribeRequest" relates
      to.  These are:

      *  "subscribe" - a "SubscriptionList" message specifying a new set
         of paths that the client wishes to subscribe to.

      *  "poll"- a "Poll" message used to specify (on an existing
         channel) that the client wishes to receive a polled update for
         the paths specified within the subscription.  The semantics of
         the "Poll" message are described in Section 3.5.1.5.3.

      *  "aliases" - used by a client to define (on an existing channel)
         a new path alias (as described in Section 2.4.2).  The use of
         the aliases message is described in Section 3.5.1.6.

   In order to create a new subscription (and its associated channel) a
   client MUST send a "SubscribeRequest" message, specifying the
   "subscribe" field.  The "SubscriptionList" may create a one-off
   subscription, a poll-only subscription, or a streaming subscription.
   In the case of ONCE subscriptions, the channel between client and
   target MUST be closed following the initial response generation.

   Subscriptions are set once, and subsequently not modified by a
   client.  If a client wishes to subscribe to additional paths from a
   target, it MUST do so by sending an additional "Subscribe" RPC call,
   specifying a new "SubscriptionList" message.  In order to end an
   existing subscription, a client simply closes the gRPC channel that
   relates to that subscription.  If a channel is initiated with a
   "SubscribeRequest" message that does not specify a "SubscriptionList"
   message with the "request" field, the target MUST consider this an
   error.  If an additional "SubscribeRequest" message specifying a
   "SubscriptionList" is sent via an existing channel, the target MUST
   respond to this message with "SubscribeResponse" message indicating
   an error message, with a contained error message indicating an error




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 26]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   code of "InvalidArgument (4)"; existing subscriptions on other gRPC
   channels MUST not be modified or terminated.

   If a client initiates a "Subscribe" RPC with a "SubscribeRequest"
   message which does not contain a "SubscriptionList" message, this is
   an error.  A "SubscribeResponse" message with the contained "error"
   message indicating a error code of "InvalidArgument" MUST be sent.
   The error text SHOULD indicate that an out-of-order operation was
   requested on a non-existent subscription.  The target MUST
   subsequently close the channel.

3.5.1.2.  The SubscriptionList Message

   A "SubscriptionList" message is used to indicate a set of paths for
   which common subscription behavior are required.  The fields of the
   message are:

   o  "subscription" - a set of "Subscription" messages that indicate
      the set of paths associated with the subscription list.

   o  "mode" - the type of subscription that is being created.  This may
      be "ONCE" (described in Section 3.5.1.5.1); "STREAM" (described in
      Section 3.5.1.5.2); or "POLL" (described in Section 3.5.1.5.3).
      The default value for the mode field is "STREAM".

   o  "prefix"- a common prefix that is applied to all paths specified
      within the message as per the definition in Section 2.4.1.  The
      default prefix is null.

   o  "use_aliases"- a boolean flag indicating whether the client
      accepts target aliases via the subscription channel.  In the case
      that such aliases are accepted, the logic described in
      Section 2.4.2 is utilised.  By default, path aliases created by
      the target are not supported.

   o  "qos" - a field describing the packet marking that is to be
      utilised for the responses to the subscription that is being
      created.  This field has a single sub-value, "marking", which
      indicates the DSCP value as a 32-bit unsigned integer.  If the
      "qos" field is not specified, the device should export telemetry
      traffic using its default DSCP marking for management-plane
      traffic.

   o  "allow_aggregation" - a boolean value used by the client to allow
      schema elements that are marked as eligible for aggregation to be
      combined into single telemetry update messages.  By default,
      aggregation MUST NOT be used.




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 27]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   o  "use_models" - a "ModelData" message (as specified in
      Section 2.6.1) specifying the schema definition modules that the
      target should use when creating a subscription.  When specified,
      the target MUST only consider data elements within the defined set
      of schema models as defined in Section 2.6.  When "use_models" is
      not specified, the target MUST consider all data elements that are
      defined in all schema modules that it supports.

   A client generating a "SubscriptionList" message MUST include the
   "subscription" field - which MUST be a non-empty set of
   "Subscription" messages, all other fields are optional.

3.5.1.3.  The Subscription Message

   A "Subscription" message generically describes a set of data that is
   to be subscribed to by a client.  It contains a "path", specified as
   per the definition in Section 2.2.2.

   There is no requirement for the path that is specified within the
   message to exist within the current data tree on the server.  Whilst
   the path within the subscription SHOULD be a valid path within the
   set of schema modules that the target supports, subscribing to any
   syntactically valid path within such modules MUST be allowed.  In the
   case that a particular path does not (yet) exist, the target MUST NOT
   close the channel, and instead should continue to monitor for the
   existence of the path, and transmit telemetry updates should it exist
   in the future.  The target MAY send a "SubscribeResponse" message
   populating the error field with "NotFound (5)" to inform the client
   that the path does not exist at the time of subscription creation.

   For "POLL" and "STREAM" subscriptions, a client may optionally
   specify additional parameters within the "Subscription" message.  The
   semantics of these additional fields are described in the relevant
   section of this document.

3.5.1.4.  The SubscribeResponse Message

   A "SubscribeResponse" message is transmitted by a target to a client
   over an established channel created by the "Subscribe" RPC.  The
   message contains the following fields:

   o  A set of fields referred to as the "response" fields, only one of
      which can be specified per "SubscribeResponse" message:

      *  "update" - a "Notification" message providing an update value
         for a subscribed data entity as described in Section 3.5.2.
         The "update" field is also utilised when a target wishes to




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 28]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


         create an alias within a subscription, as described in
         Section 3.5.2.2.

      *  "sync_response" - a boolean field indicating that a particular
         set of data values has been transmitted, used for "POLL" and
         "STREAM" subscriptions.

      *  "error" - an "Error" message transmitted to indicate an error
         has occurred within a particular "Subscribe" RPC call.

3.5.1.5.  Creating Subscriptions

3.5.1.5.1.  ONCE Subscriptions

   A subscription operating in the "ONCE" mode acts as a single request/
   response channel.  The target creates the relevant update messages,
   transmits them, and subsequently closes the channel.

   In order to create a one-off subscription, a client sends a
   "SubscribeRequest" message to the target.  The "subscribe" field
   within this message specifies a "SubscriptionList" with the mode
   field set to "ONCE".  Updates corresponding to the subscription are
   generated as per the semantics described in Section 3.5.2.

   Following the transmission of all updates which correspond to data
   items within the set of paths specified within the subscription list,
   a "SubscribeResponse" message with the "sync_response" field set to
   "true" MUST be transmitted, and the channel over which the
   "SubscribeRequest" was received MUST be closed.

3.5.1.5.2.  STREAM Subscriptions

   Stream subscriptions are long-lived subscriptions which continue to
   transmit updates relating to the set of paths that are covered within
   the subscription indefinitely.

   A "STREAM" subscription is created by sending a "SubscribeRequest"
   message with the subscribe field containing a "SubscriptionList"
   message with the type specified as "STREAM".  Each entry within the
   "Subscription" message is specified with one of the following
   "modes":

   o  On Change ("ON_CHANGE") - when a subscription is defined to be "on
      change", data updates are only sent when the value of the data
      item changes.  A heartbeat interval MAY be specified along with an
      "on change" subscription - in this case, the value of the data
      item(s) MUST be re-sent once per heartbeat interval regardless of
      whether the value has changed or not.



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 29]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   o  Sampled ("SAMPLE") - a subscription that is defined to be sampled
      MUST be specified along with a "sample_interval" encoded as an
      unsigned 64-bit integer representing nanoseconds.  The value of
      the data item(s) is sent once per sample interval to the client.
      If the target is unable to support the desired "sample_interval"
      it MUST reject the subscription by returning a "SubscribeResponse"
      message with the error field set to an error message indicating
      the "InvalidArgument (3)" error code.  If the "sample_interval" is
      set to 0, the target MUST create the subscription and send the
      data with the lowest interval possible for the target.

      *  Optionally, the "suppress_redundant" field of the
         "Subscription" message may be set for a sampled subscription.
         In the case that it is set to "true", the target SHOULD NOT
         generate a telemetry update message unless the value of the
         path being reported on has changed since the last update was
         generated.  Updates MUST only be generated for those individual
         leaf nodes in the subscription that have changed.  That is to
         say that for a subscription to "/a/b" - where there are leaves
         "c" and "d" branching from the "b" node - if the value of "c"
         has changed, but "d" remains unchanged, an update for "d" MUST
         NOT be generated, whereas an update for "c" MUST be generated.

      *  A "heartbeat_interval" MAY be specified to modify the behavior
         of "suppress_redundant" in a sampled subscription.  In this
         case, the target MUST generate one telemetry update per
         heartbeat interval, regardless of whether the
         "suppress_redundant" flag is set to "true".  This value is
         specified as an unsigned 64-bit integer in nanoseconds.

   o  Target Defined "(TARGET_DEFINED)" - when a client creates a
      subscription specifying the target defined mode, the target SHOULD
      determine the best type of subscription to be created on a per-
      leaf basis.  That is to say, if the path specified within the
      message refers to some leaves which are event driven (e.g., the
      changing of state of an entity based on an external trigger) then
      an "ON_CHANGE" subscription may be created, whereas if other data
      represents counter values, a "SAMPLE" subscription may be created.

3.5.1.5.3.  POLL Subscriptions

   Polling subscriptions are used for on-demand retrieval of statistics
   via long-lived channels.  A poll subscription relates to a certain
   set of subscribed paths, and is initiated by sending a
   "SubscribeRequest" message with encapsulated "SubscriptionList".
   "Subscription" messages contained within the "SubscriptionList"
   indicate the set of paths that are of interest to the polling client.




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 30]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   To retrieve data from the target, a client sends a "SubscribeRequest"
   message to the target, containing a "poll" field, specified to be an
   empty "Poll" message.  On reception of such a message, the target
   MUST generate updates for all the corresponding paths within the
   "SubscriptionList".  Updates MUST be generated according to
   Section 3.5.2.

3.5.1.6.  Client-defined Aliases within a Subscription

   When a client wishes to create an alias that a target should use for
   a path, the client should send a "SubscribeRequest" message
   specifying the "aliases" field.  The "aliases" field consists of an
   "AliasList" message.  An "AliasList" specifies a list of aliases,
   each of which consists of:

   o  "path" - the target path for the alias - encoded as per
      Section 2.2.2.

   o  "alias" - the (client-defined) alias for the path, encoded as per
      Section 2.4.2.

   Where a target is unable to support a client-defined alias it SHOULD
   respond with a "SubscribeResponse" message with the error field
   indicating an error of the following types:

   o  "InvalidArgument (3)" where the specified alias is not acceptable
      to the target.

   o  "AlreadyExists (6)" where the alias defined is a duplicate of an
      existing alias for the client.

   o  "ResourceExhausted (8)" where the target has insufficient memory
      or processing resources to support the alias.

   o  "Unknown (2)" in all other cases.

   Thus, for a client to create an alias corresponding to the
   path"/a/b/c/d[id=10]/e" with the name "shortPath", it sends a
   "SubscribeRequest" message with the following fields specified:












Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 31]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


                        subscriberequest: <
                          aliases: <
                            alias: <
                              path: <
                                element: "a"
                                element: "b"
                                element: "c"
                                element: "d[id=10]"
                                element: "e"
                              >
                              alias: "#shortPath"
                            >
                          >
                        >

   If the alias is acceptable to the target, subsequent updates are
   transmitted using the "#shortPath" alias in the same manner as
   described in Section 3.5.2.2.

3.5.2.  Sending Telemetry Updates

3.5.2.1.  Bundling of Telemetry Updates

   Since multiple "Notification" messages can be included in the update
   field of a "SubscribeResponse" message, it is possible for a target
   to bundle messages such that fewer messages are sent to the client.
   The advantage of such bundling is clearly to reduce the number of
   bytes on the wire (caused by message overhead).  Since "Notification"
   messages contain the timestamp at which an event occurred, or a
   sample was taken, such bundling does not affect the sample accuracy
   to the client.  However, bundling does have a negative impact on the
   freshness of the data in the client - and on the client's ability to
   react to events on the target.

   Since it is not possible for the target to infer whether its clients
   are sensitive to the latency introduced by bundling, if a target
   implements optimizations such that multiple "Notification" messages
   are bundled together, it MUST provide an ability to disable this
   functionality within the configuration of the gNMI service.
   Additionally, a target SHOULD provide means by which the operator can
   control the maximum number of updates that are to be bundled into a
   single message, This configuration is expected to be implemented out-
   of-band to the gNMI protocol itself.








Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 32]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


3.5.2.2.  Target-defined Aliases within a Subscription

   Where the "use_aliases" field of a "SubscriptionList" message has
   been set to "true", a target MAY create aliases for paths within a
   subscription.  A target-defined alias MUST be created separately from
   an update to the corresponding data item(s).

   To create a target-defined alias, a "SubscribeResponse" message is
   generated with the "update" field set to a "Notification" message.
   The "Notification" message specifies the aliased path within the
   "prefix" field, and a non-null "alias" field, specified according to
   Section 2.4.2.

   Thus, a target wishing to create an alias relating to the path "/a/b/
   c[id=10]" and subsequently update children of the "c[id=10]"entity
   must:

   1.  Generate a "SubscribeResponse" message and transmit it over the
       channel to the client:

                        subscriberesponse: <
                          update: <
                            timestamp: (timestamp)
                            prefix: <
                              element: "a"
                              element: "b"
                              element: "c[id=10]"
                            >
                            alias: "#42"
                          >
                        >

   1.  Subsequently, this alias can be used to provide updates for the
       "child1" leaf corresponding to "/a/b/c[id=10]/child1":

















Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 33]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


     subscriberesponse: <
       update: <
         timestamp: (timestamp)
         prefix: <
           element: "#42"
         >
         update: <
           path: <
             element: "child1"
           >
           value: <
             value: 102                      // integer representation
             type: JSON_IETF
           >
         >
       >
     >

3.5.2.3.  Sending Telemetry Updates

   When an update for a subscribed telemetry path is to be sent, a
   "SubscribeResponse" message is sent from the target to the client, on
   the channel associated with the subscription.  The "update" field of
   the message contains a "Notification" message as per the description
   in Section 2.1.  The "timestamp" field of the "Notification" message
   MUST be set to the time at which the value of the path that is being
   updated was collected.

   Where a leaf node's value has changed, or a new node has been
   created, an "Update" message specifying the path and value for the
   updated data item MUST be appended to the "update" field of the
   message.

   Where a node within the subscribed paths has been removed, the
   "delete" field of the "Notification" message MUST have the path of
   the node that has been removed appended to it.

   When the target has transmitted the initial updates for all paths
   specified within the subscription, a "SubscribeResponse" message with
   the "sync_response" field set to "true" MUST be transmitted to the
   client to indicate that the initial transmission of updates has
   concluded.  This provides an indication to the client that all of the
   existing data for the subscription has been sent at least once.  For
   "STREAM" subscriptions, such messages are not required for subsequent
   updates.  For "POLL" subscriptions, after each set of updates for
   individual poll request, a "SubscribeResponse" message with the
   "sync_response" field set to "true" MUST be generated.




Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 34]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


4.  References

4.1.  URIs

   [1] http://grpc.io

   [2] https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/

   [3] https://github.com/openconfig/reference/blob/master/rpc/gnmi/
       gnmi.proto

   [4] https://github.com/openconfig/reference/blob/master/rpc/gnmi/
       gnmi-specification.md

   [5] http://www.openconfig.net/

   [6] https://github.com/openconfig/reference/blob/master/rpc/gnmi/
       gnmi-path-conventions.md

   [7] https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159

   [8] https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7159

   [9] https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc7951

   [10] http://www.grpc.io/grpc-java/javadoc/index.html

   [11] https://godoc.org/google.golang.org/grpc/codes#Code

   [12] http://www.grpc.io/grpc/cpp/classgrpc_1_1_status.html

   [13] https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/draft-openconfig-netmod-model-
        catalog/

   [14] https://tools.ietf.org/html/draft-openconfig-netmod-model-
        catalog-01

   [15] https://github.com/openconfig/reference/blob/master/rpc/gnmi/
        gnmi-authentication.md

   [16] http://www.openconfig.net/documentation/semantic-versioning/

   [17] https://github.com/openconfig/reference/blob/master/rpc/gnmi/
        gnmi.proto







Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 35]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


Appendix A.  Appendix: Current Protobuf Message and Service
             Specification

   The latest Protobuf IDL gNMI specification is found at [17].

Appendix B.  Appendix: Current Outstanding Issues/Future Features

   o  Ability for the client to exclude paths from a subscription or
      get.

   o  "Dial out" for the target to register with an NMS and publish pre-
      configured subscriptions.

Authors' Addresses

   Rob Shakir
   Google, Inc.
   1600 Amphitheatre Parkway
   Mountain View, CA  94043

   Email: robjs@google.com


   Anees Shaikh
   Google
   1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy
   Mountain View, CA  94043
   US

   Email: aashaikh@google.com


   Paul Borman
   Google
   1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy
   Mountain View, CA  94043
   US

   Email: borman@google.com


   Marcus Hines
   Google
   1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy
   Mountain View, CA  94043
   US

   Email: hines@google.com



Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 36]

Internet-Draft             gNMI specification                 March 2017


   Carl Lebsack
   Google
   1600 Amphitheatre Pkwy
   Mountain View, CA  94043
   US

   Email: csl@google.com


   Chris Morrow
   Google

   Email: christopher.morrow@gmail.com






































Shakir, et al.         Expires September 14, 2017              [Page 37]
